Well, welcome to this 2019, January, the 18th, 2019 edition of Ask Your Herb Doctor.
As usual, the third Friday of every month is given to the show, which is a one-hour live call-in
from 7.30 until the end of the show at 8 o'clock. And this month's topic is going to be just
wrapping up the last two discourses from December and November on skin cancer. But to tie in the
topic of oncogenes with viruses and epigenetics with the viricidal activity of selected medicinal
plants, there's lots of research. And whilst I know there has to be a little bit of reservation
and careful reading around the subject, there's a wealth of new articles being published on PubMed
and other "scientific peer-reviewed sites", ResearchGate and quite a few others. I've got
lots of 2018 and some even from this month, January 2019, research being done either on
new subjects around viricidal components or bringing up old material with a new spin,
as we'll see with camphor and some of its imine derivatives. The number here, if you live in the
area or if in fact, if you live in Iceland or anywhere else on the planet, is 707-923-3911.
We'd love to hear from you from 7.30 until the end of the show. For those people, especially,
who have experience with Dr. Peat, following his protocols, seeing the benefits, Dr. Peat,
again, thank you so much for joining us this month. For those people who perhaps haven't heard
of you and don't know too much about you, I will just give a rundown of your academic and professional
background before we get started. Okay. Graduate study in biology for a PhD, 1968-72, University
of Oregon. And since then, following up on some of the ideas that I worked on for my dissertation,
aging and cell energy production, basically. And among other things, that includes how hormones
and foods promote viral immunity. Okay, good. I'll just qualify what you briefly touched on there.
You're a big advocate of, well, let's call it natural medicine anyway, but a big advocate of
food-based help in terms of helping the organism to recover their homeostasis, their balance,
to fight infection, etc., whether it's producing natural steroids or fighting bacteria and viruses.
So you're a big advocate of good food. And essentially in that, I think when I first
discovered you, you were the person who pretty much set me straight with fish oils and liquid
oils as being good for you, that actually being very destructive. So you'd spend a lot of time
discussing the nutrition aspects of healing, don't you? And the immune system ideas go way back
before I went to graduate school in biology. I had read some of William F. Koch's research,
and some of his colleagues found that the treatments he used for curing cancer also
worked for curing animal diseases such as mastitis in cows. And he showed that the healthy cow could
actually have more bacteria in its udder than the sick cow with mastitis, and that a healthy cow
tolerated microorganisms without suffering damage from them. And that was what led me to get
interested in the newer research. Jamie Cunliffe in England has what he calls the damage theory of
immunity in which the immune system really is a system for repairing tissue damage. And if
microorganisms cause damage, then the immune system so-called will clear out the microorganisms
that cause the damage. But that's a side effect of repairing the damage. Pauli Matsinger
about the same time came out with the danger hypothesis. And that's very similar, except
it isn't really as realistic as Jamie Cunliffe's, because it still leaves it open for seeing the
microorganism as intrinsically dangerous. I think the facts indicate that we can tolerate
microorganisms as long as they don't poison us. Right, or if indeed we're not poisoned by the
environment in which we live. Yeah. I mean, it's a very grand idea. And I think for some people,
they are successful in putting it into practice. I think, speaking from personal experience,
in terms of having been helped by you and guided and put straight about things that I thought were
true when I was studying herbal medicine in England back in 1993. It's like I said, a grand
idea to have that common route that the body is intrinsically able to heal itself if you give it
the right material. And I don't necessarily mean the drugs, whatever it is that pharmaceutical
companies produce to treat quote unquote, the illness, but that the body has got a fairly
good, it's got an incredibly miraculous way of running per se. And then it has a pretty good
way of dealing with organisms and threats to its own homeostasis, which will hopefully we get into
here fairly soon. When you look at a viral disease epidemic, there are always people who don't
succumb to it. And you often find that they have contracted the infection, they have antibodies
to it, but it didn't make them at all sick, or just slightly sick. Yeah. Okay, I just wanted to
remind myself here, when you started talking about, you know, the organism and, you know,
the cows with the higher loads of bacteria that were actually fairly, you know, safe and
non susceptible. That makes me think of the theory of terrain that I read research that I was doing
my dissertation on the essential oils of the labiae, the mint family when I was studying
my degree in herbal medicine. And there was a couple of French scientists who developed this
theory of the terroir, or the terrain of the organism being exactly what you're saying,
the key pivotal moment around which disease will or won't affect the organism and how
the terrain could be subtly changed with essential oils. And I got to learn about the isoprenoids
and the terpenes and all of the other volatile smells that we get from the mint family. And I
hopefully later on, I will touch on some of those medicinal herbs that have had some fairly recent
documentation as being viricidal. And again, I got to make it kind of make it plain that people
need to do their own research. Because when I bought articles to your attention and say,
well, hey, how about this? You've said, well, actually, that's not because of this,
it's because of this. And I think we'll maybe talk about that a little bit concerning
mevalonate and statins and how this whole, it was supposedly a good thing. But let me
kind of first start by just clearing up a few questions from the last month about
melanoma. We talked about skin cancers, whether it's basal cell or squamous cell and,
or actinic keratosis, or whatever they want to classify them at. But apparently, the incidence
of melanoma has been on the rise exponentially since the 80s. I think from before that,
I've seen that it has increased 500% since about 1940. Okay, what do you think about that? Do you
reasons for that? I'm pretty sure it's not sun exposure, because it has an inverse
relation with altitude. And the change that I think is relevant is the polyunsaturated fats
in the diet, which have increased just about at the same rate that melanoma has.
Are you thinking it's because the polyunsaturates are energy depleting and or producing lipid
fish skin and the skin or your many of those things? Yeah, the energy goes down and inflammation
goes up. In the veteran study, supposedly, to prevent heart disease in the 1960s, they gave
corn oil based diet to one group and regular fats, including margarine and butter and ordinary,
moderately unsaturated fats. And the one group that got corn oil in their diet regularly,
at the end of eight years, had three times the mortality from cancer.
So, one of the industry's own studies related to what you see in the animal studies that,
for example, if you look at just linoleic acid, which was the original
essential fatty acid, so called, as the proportion of linoleic acid in the diet goes up, the
cancer incidence mortality goes up right with in proportion to linoleic acid.
Okay, these are just because the pro-inflammatory nature
of this in people's diets and in the food chain in general. And they do interfere with
production and use of cholesterol. Right. Okay, good. I'm glad you mentioned that,
because we will touch on that again a little bit later. Okay, so I was looking at an article that
his headline was the following, I just wanted you to say, if you can comment on this, that
the lung cancer incidence decreases with elevation, quote unquote, evidence for oxygen as an inhaled
carcinogen. So, oxygen at sea level versus altitude and what you've always mentioned about
CO2 being protective with longevity definitely increasing with elevation.
The insurance companies have known for more than 100 years that cancer mortality in general
decreases with altitude, very low and high altitude cities. And as the oxygen pressure
in the air increases, the carbon dioxide tends to decrease. If they are competitive,
the pressure of oxygen displaces the carbon dioxide bound to blood.
So this is at sea level. So people at sea level are much more likely,
perhaps statistically, than to get cancer because they don't have the protective effect of CO2 that
you'd get at altitude. Yeah, it's an anti-inflammatory protective factor.
Okay, good. All right. Well, you're listening to Ask Your Ob-Doctor on KMUD Gov. Bill
91.1 FM from 7.30 till the end of the show. We'd love to take calls related or hopefully not too
unrelated to this subject of skin cancer, oncogenes, and then hopefully in a bit here, we'll
get into some viricidal activity of medicinal plants and ask Dr. Peat his opinion of the
structures because I know he's got a few favorites, especially those things that have dark pigments
and/or the dark red color, the free radical quenching things like palyarcho. But anyway,
the number here, if you're in the area or even if you're not, is 707-923-3911.
So I just wanted again to just quickly cover what I found is very disparate information on the one
hand. This is all from either looking at PubMed articles or ResearchGate articles. And again,
you can definitely offer your impression of those. And I know that you've got a lot of history with
bad research being uncovered and you're finding information that's completely contrary
and/or just downright stupid being published. I don't know how it happens, but it happens. It
gets into print and people read it and then you've got to spend a time unlearning a lot of things
that you thought were the way you've been told they were. But statins, I know you're completely
against statins and actually you've got a very different base level at which someone's cholesterol
will be termed by you healthy. I know the medical association start looking at interfering with
people's cholesterol levels when they get up to 200 or so milligram percent. And you've always
said that the elderly or even people over 50, not that elderly, but people over the age of 50
want a cholesterol level of 200 or 220 to 230. So in terms of what statins do, I saw from their
pharmacology that they block mevalonate or they can interfere with mevalonate and it's a kind of
upstream chemical. And this can cause aneuploidy and this in its own right is really quite a serious
outcome for using statins. So if you experimentally starve cells for cholesterol,
the same thing that statins does to the person, the cells in vitro are stuck in the tetraploid
state. They can't do the reductive separation of chromosomes and old people's skin is
relatively loaded with cells stuck in that state because with aging, the cells lose their ability
to maintain the production of cholesterol. And when they get stuck in that condition,
then if something forces them to divide, they get the number of chromosomes
sort of randomized as they divide and that can produce cancer cells.
Do you see any protocol or do you have any kind of answers in terms of rejuvenating skin cholesterol?
Experimentally and in the cosmetic industry, they're starting to put cholesterol in cosmetics
because it in effect does rejuvenate the cells. It restores their ability to divide healthfully.
So you can physically topically apply cholesterol in the form of anointment or cream to the skin
and expect the skin to take up a reasonable portion of that?
That's what the experiments show and the cosmetics companies are taking advantage of it.
Interesting. Okay, because that was the whole thing that you mentioned about vitamin D production in
the elderly. You have to have twice as much or more sunlight exposure to get the same conversion
from cholesterol to vitamin D, which is so important for immune health and immune suppression,
immune surveillance. There's half as much cholesterol in the old skin as...
Half as much. Okay, so that's a potential to look out for then. And I think from an anti-aging
perspective of... I know the collagen is the issue, well, it's some of the issue in people's skin when
they get older, when it starts to look a little unsightly or wrinkly or saggy or whatever, however
they'd want to describe it. Do you think there's much that can be done to restore the collagen or
the scaffold in which the skin is normally elastic and stretchy? Yeah, the cells normally are able to
turn it over. Energized cells can eat up the hardened, crystalline, aged collagen and let the
cells produce fresh collagen. And the cholesterol lets the cells divide normally and so they are
more energetic, produce a thicker layer of healthy cells rather than a scaly, hardened layer of
aged, flaky cells. Okay, so there does seem to be then, from what you're saying, research showing
that that is beneficial, that if people want to think a little bit along those lines down the road,
they could probably do something themselves in terms of acquiring cholesterol and, again,
because it's very... it's amphoteric and it's moiety, isn't it? There's a hydrophilic
head, is it, and a hydrophobic tail? It's one or the other. Yeah, the practical way to keep your
cholesterol synthesis ability is to avoid polyunsaturated fatty acids because they turn off
the synthesis of cholesterol and interfere with its use in the cells. Yeah, okay. I know I've had
this question put to you before. In terms of raising your cholesterol, you've always advocated
orange juice as a good fructose source that would actually increase a person's cholesterol. Yeah,
getting the cell energized with sugar and supplementing thyroid if necessary. Yeah,
so if you were able to do this, you're saying you think the cholesterol here itself would be
distributed evenly throughout the body and actually in the skin you would wind up with a
higher concentration of cholesterol than before? Yeah, except if your body is already saturated
with polyunsaturated fats, they will interfere with it and misdirect, put it into harmful forms.
The aging brain has much less, about half as much free cholesterol as the young brain,
but it fills up with the ester form combined with polyunsaturated fatty acids.
Okay, so apart, and again it's just good to refresh me on this subject, but in terms of,
you've always said that four years is a rough approximation for the turnover of lipids in the
cell. So given that you had a completely exclusive diet of saturated fats and you completely excluded
polyunsaturated, after four years there should be a fairly good turnover within the cells.
How is this the same with the brain, for example, if you're talking about the polyunsaturates
causing damage in the brain and interfering with energy production and the whole thing
for dementia and etc down the road? Every night there's a tremendous turnover of lipids in the
brain, but when you're asleep your blood sugar falls and the free fatty acids tend to be liberated
from your fat stores. And so if you have bad fat in your fat tissue during the night, it's going to
be in the blood vessels when your brain is remaking itself. So if you can keep your blood sugar up or
get your fat so that it's pretty saturated, then your brain every night remakes itself considerably.
Okay, and then this is again, it's a little off topic, but we've gotten on to the,
excuse me, the topic of cholesterol. What about the, I think you mentioned this chemical to me a
month or two months ago, hydroxymethylbutyrate as a producer of cholesterol, was it a precursor?
Yeah, it's a precursor that supposedly helps to increase it.
I think most people are always thinking about decreasing their cholesterol, but I'm always
thinking about increasing it. I know my cholesterol is actually low. I almost have a
problem with it. It's probably 135, 140. It's very important to get it up to 160.
Bodybuilders are the ones experimenting with this precursor, but I haven't heard much from them
about its effectiveness. Interesting. Well, I'm due to get some basic blood work here done in the
next month or two, and I'll see if it actually has increased through using this product. Because I
know it varies quite a bit, and I think that may either be a seasonal variation with whatever food
groups that we're particularly eating, whether it's the fruits and those sweet, juicy things
during the summertime, or probably gravitating towards less of that and probably having to rely
more on things like gelatin and meats in the winter times without so much fresh fruit. But anyway,
it's coming up for half past seven here. So if people have any questions, the number is 707-923-3911.
Give us five minutes or so. I think we have one or two callers kind of waiting. Let's just sit
tight here. Actually, people were concerned about the roads, and I can let you know that the big
tree is still across the road on the ave near Weyott, but it seems as though the power line is
off the road at Elk Creek Road. A caller will call us back and let us know for sure. But still,
please drive very carefully. There are traffic hazards everywhere.
Okay, so Dr. Peat, if I can get into antivirals and have you give your perspective, because I know
it's very different. And again, it takes a kind of a constant relearning in terms of cementing this.
But the viricides per se, whether or not they are the latest and greatest direct acting antivirals
or plant-based antivirals that are specific antivirals for things like herpes or whether
they're for cytomegalovirus or the whole Zika thing that's happened here or dengue fever.
There's lots of fairly current research which has been done on medicinal plants and the components
of those, and I'll get into those a bit later and ask you if you know anything about them in terms
of the structure, because I think that's the important part. Lots of them seem to be flavonoids
and essential oil components, which seem to have quite a high affinity for viricidal activity.
But within the actual role of viruses and how they take over the cell to manufacture their
own virions and replicate, and in things like hepatitis, they reach huge proportions and burst
out of the cell, liberating millions of new viruses. And this whole thing just seems to be so
out of this world and sci-fi. Part of our genome is viral and is part of probably our historical,
you know, being in contact with viruses historically, how these things have just
become part of our makeup. And I'm not saying it's good, and I don't think you would say that
viruses are good either, but in some ways I think you've said that they are messengers and can be
used or can be understood in some beneficial terms. But if you have anything to say on that,
then I'll question you about some of the specifics. A very large part of our genome resembles the
retroviruses. But when you wonder how viruses came into being, since they can only exist in
the cells of higher animals, they obviously derive in some way from the higher animal's
genetic material. And it's only in the last several years that Western biochemists are
starting to recognize that there are particles circulating in our blood and lip system.
A Korean 60 years ago claimed that he discovered a third circulatory system other than blood and
lymph, which carries particles of genetic material. And about 10 years ago, this was actually
documented to not the third circulatory system, but the fact that there are very small particles
of nucleic acids circulating in the blood and lymph carrying genetic information to repair cells or
change their functions. The particles are so small that people examining blood under microscopes just
considered it to be sort of dust in the background. But with proper magnification, they see that there
are these micro vesicles, they call, which bud off from the surface of cells or exosomes, some of
them are called. They carry both DNA and RNA and proteins and other parts of cells that act as
signals, for example, between a working organ like the lungs and the turnover of cells in the bone
marrow that are producing stem cells and immune cells and so on. So all of our organs are
communicating with each other through these little particles that are about the size of viruses and
that contain genetic information and proteins the way viruses do. Do you think there's anything,
well, let's say the word useful about viruses? I mean, I've always imagined viruses just to be
the bad guys and just you don't want to pick up a virus if you can at all avoid it, because
there's nothing good about them. Is there anything to be said for viruses? I know most viruses,
the smart ones at least try to keep the host alive. But a lot of viruses, you know, end up with
causing morbidity and early death. So when bacteria are exposed to a dangerous environment,
such as antibiotics, they are able or starvation, they are able to edit, re-engineer their own
genes to produce adaptive changes. So it's now recognized that bacteria are capable of
non-random so-called mutations for defensive adaptive purposes. And when one bacterium
achieves the immunity to a certain thing in the environment, they can conveniently
pack it up into a little exosome, a plasmid, which they pass on to their neighbors. So it spreads
like a viral infection. It's like a self-constructed virus that the bacteria pass on
for the defense of the community. And within our body, we're passing these little plasmids
or micro-vesicles to different parts of the body. When we eat another organism,
we incorporate some of their DNA into our own cellular DNA. You eat beef and you get some
cow DNA incorporated in the cells. You eat carrots and you get some carrot DNA.
In that sense, we're communicating across species all the time genetically. It's kind of equivalent
to what the bacteria do defensively. But I imagine that viruses have some of that function so that
if it's in our genes and it's like a bacterium can use its adaptive ability to change its genes
or to find this plasmid that it has received from a neighbor. I think we have the ability to
look into our genetic reservoir, including carrot and cow genes, to see what's useful.
And that these things, if they aren't useful, if we're not able to adaptively use them,
if our energy is very low, then they can cause trouble. They can interfere with our adaptation.
But if our energy is high, I think getting these particles of genetic information
can actually increase our repertoire. Very good. Interesting. Okay. Well,
I think we have a caller on the line. So let's take this first caller. You're on the air. Where
are you from, caller? What's your question? I'm from New York. Andrew, by the way, great
questions tonight. Really excellent job. I want to ask you two questions, but I want to follow
up on the cholesterol, if you ask me in context. The total cholesterol, 2225 to 230 for older
people. What about, is that the only one that matters? There's triglycerides, there's LD,
HDL. And it's very hard to know how to consider those. What are the appropriate ranges,
even relative to someone who has a normal cholesterol, let's say, of 225?
Okay. So Dr. Peat, what would you say about HDL, LDL, triglycerides in terms of their range?
Actually, let's start off. You actually view, quote me if I'm wrong, but the quote unquote bad
cholesterol is not what you see as a bad cholesterol at all. You see that actually is a
building block for manufacturing steroid hormones.
Okay. Maybe I engineer as, I think our engineer might've hung up.
We just lost Dr. Peat somehow. I'll get him back.
Okay. Well, let's just, I guess we can do some music or something until Dr. Peat comes back on.
I could just discuss the next subject, but it seems a little, it seems a little wry,
unless we have him on the line.
Okay.
Well, like I said a little bit earlier on, we'll hopefully get into some of the medicinal plants
that have been shown to be viricidal, viristatic, and just briefly talk about some of the compounds
that are responsible for those effects. So anyway, I think we have the call back. We have Dr. Peat
back, hopefully. Dr. Peat, you there? Yeah. The part of his question I heard was
about triglycerides. Yeah. He said, what was the relative proportions of the other components,
HDL, LDL, and triglycerides? But I know that you view LDL and HDL differently to the way that they
would class them good and bad cholesterol. You don't actually look at them that way. So the
question was the relative proportions in terms of what would be healthy or normal, given that you
advocate a slightly higher cholesterol than what would typically be seen as a regular normal
cholesterol. Yeah. When you're low density, cholesterol is low. That's what increases the
cancer risk or dementia risk, too. But the things that poison your liver or stress you increase the
HDL. And it happens that that protein that forms the HDL is anti-inflammatory. So it's a defensive
reaction to stress. Estrogen and alcohol, for example, will increase the HDL defensively.
But the LDL is a protective source of the cholesterol. And if the triglycerides are
fairly saturated, they aren't very harmful. They found that heart failure is actually
less of a problem if your triglycerides are high. But if the triglycerides are polyunsaturated,
that goes with interference with the function of the cholesterol. And free fatty acids are
the dangerous form of fats in the blood. They have multiple interference, for example,
with oxidative metabolism and the use of sugar. But the triglycerides are pretty innocuous. They're
just evidence that you're under stress and not using your sugar properly.
Okay. That was a good question.
My question that I had before Andrew asked that question earlier, that was a follow on,
relates to a 22-year-old. Just as an example, he sprains his ankle. The ligaments, some ligaments
are torn. Some are stretched. Let's say one is stretched, one is torn. And he's trying to get
back and walking. It's entirely blown up with swelling and stress, as you know. When that
happens, it turns. What are the three or four things that you would do to make sure that it
heals properly? Meaning that I think, based on what I've read, is you think that healing is
ideal in a baby when there's no scar tissue. But we're told that scar tissue has to form in order
for the torn ligament to attach back to the bone and for the stretched ligament to tighten up on
its own. You will have to form scar tissue for that to happen. And we're thinking that that
might lead to arthritis, et cetera, down the road. So I'm just wondering, right now, to avoid
problems with arthritis 20 years from now, what is someone who is a 22-year-old, what should they
be doing now to heal the injury quickly and focus on the long-term low scar tissue outcome?
Things to keep the free fatty acids low so that you use your glucose as efficiently as possible
to produce anti-inflammatory things like carbon dioxide. And aspirin and niacinamide, for example,
are anti-inflammatory things that reduce the disorganizing kind of scar tissue and promote
maximum quality healing with a minimum of excess random collagen deposition.
Gotcha. Okay. And so red light and CO2 would also be useful, but those are more short-term
trauma-reducing issues. The actual intake of low-proof aspirin and niacinamide, you're saying,
will help reduce the scarring yet facilitate healing properly.
And vitamin D and vitamin K are very important. Getting enough calcium in your diet with vitamin D
so that you keep your parathyroid hormone suppressed to keep the tissue energy high,
including salt in your diet to keep the aldosterone to a minimum because aldosterone
promotes disorganized collagen healing and fibrosis. So some unexpected things, sodium and
calcium in the diet are protective to the healing of connective tissue.
Gotcha. So the last aspect of this, if a doctor tells you, a trained doctor says, "Gee, the only
way it's going to heal is when the scar tissue develops."
Well, good scar tissue is fine, but the worse your metabolism is, the more disorganized the
scar tissue is so that a keloid, for example, is terrible scar tissue, very disorganized because of
polyunsaturated fats in your circulation, disorganizing the healing. A baby in utero
with no essential fatty acids in circulation and plenty of carbon dioxide will heal without
any disorganized structures. That's a great answer and I appreciate that. Can I ask one
other question, Andrew? Very quick because we do have a couple of other callers, so let's be quick.
Will do. So let's say an older person has fungal toe and they've had it for a really long time.
Someone has suggested mixing equal parts of apple cider vinegar and hydrogen peroxide and soaking
the toe for 30 minutes each day for about a month. I know you've mentioned sulfur,
but what do you think about this idea? I've tried it and it does change. It does have a
physiological effect, but I'm not sure whether it's a good one or a bad one. So that's...
How about iodine, Dr. Peat?
Yeah, iodine is a good fungus killer. Vinegar is a pretty fair antagonist to the fungus.
Uh, in combination with hydrogen peroxide, because that seems to be a fantastic product.
Both of them individually, I imagine together they work all right too.
Okay, so I just another way to do it. So you're okay with that approach?
It sounds very safe. You can damage this tissue with too much hydrogen peroxide.
Once I spilled some 30 percent peroxide on my finger and it turned strangely paper white,
and I stuck it in a bottle of ascorbic acid and in a flash it looked normal.
All right, well thank you for your call, Gawler.
Thank you.
Yeah, we'd like to get these next people able to ask. So next caller,
you're on the air. Where are you from? What's your question?
Hi, I'm from Calgary, Alberta. And Dr. Peat, I had followed your suggestion to take coconut oil,
but I find that every single time I try it, I've tried taking it and then removing it from my diet.
Every time I try to take it, it does wonderful things for me, but it causes me really,
really bad digestive distress. And I'm wondering why.
What kind of coconut oil is it?
Um, I did try the, like the ultra purified or whatever it's called. And then lately I've been
taking the, like the scented one. Not scented, but like not refined.
I found that the nice tasting unrefined ones were harder on the intestine. And the ultra refined and
even hydrogenated coconut oil, I find is easiest on the intestine.
Okay. Okay, good. And I mean, did you, out of curiosity, did you ever find that
happened to you? Like when you were first starting it or was it fine?
No, I did find that different brands, if they, if you put it on a hot frying pan and if it smells,
then it's more likely to hurt your intestine. It should be odorless when it hits a hot pan.
Okay. Okay. Good to know. I'll give that a try and hopefully it works.
Cause honestly I've had great success with it. I, um, you know, normally without it,
I can't go long without eating, like I'll get really low blood sugar,
but it helps me go so long without eating. It's absolutely incredible. So I'm really
thankful for your suggestion and thank you for having me on the air tonight.
Okay. Thanks for your call caller. Okay. So let's take this next call.
I'll call you on the air. Where are you from? And what's your question?
Caller you're on the air. Caller. That's why we say, listen on your
phone, not on the radio. Three, two, one next caller. You are the caller.
Okay. Caller you're on the air. Where are you from? What's your question? The other
caller should call back incidentally, if they can use a regular landline, that would be great.
Yeah. I could hear that. I'm on, uh, I'm from Toronto.
Okay. Wow.
To hear me. Yeah, I can go ahead. What's your question?
Okay. Uh, what can an individual do who has an opportunity to kind of intercept a psychopath
and prevent the damage the psychopath would do to others? I just want to know if
Ray Peat has any, uh, insight into that kind of psychological, uh, condition. Uh,
cause it seems that, uh, psychologists say there's nothing that can be done to,
to normalize a psychopath or a cluster B. And I understand it makes up like 14% of the population.
And does it have something? Yeah. Is the psychopath on medication?
Uh, yeah, probably. I'm not sure if they are on medication or not, but, uh, might have something
to do with, uh, yeah, bipolar or a separate type of diagnosis. Well, Dr. Peat I'm not too sure there's
an answer for it, but if anyone's got one, you have, uh, keeping the brain well energized.
And, uh, yeah, that means keeping the blood sugar steady. Uh, uh, sometimes, uh, just a very
digestible diet can make a person feel so much better that they don't have to exploit and
manipulate other people. And that might have something to do with the sort of narcissistic,
uh, quality to it. That, uh, it might be kind of a, a sort of a food, uh, condition, not,
not wanting to eat or, or, or kind of, uh, having low calorie intake. So, uh, yeah, I think
addictive personality that needs alcohol or drugs and such is somewhat in the same boat, uh, needing
something that's, that they, uh, can't get themselves that they, uh, try to, uh, uh,
control others to make their life better. But if their life suddenly becomes better by changing
their metabolism, uh, I've seen a lifetime addicts to alcohol or heroin or cocaine just overnight,
literally, uh, drop their addiction. Good. Excellent. Okay. Well, let's just, uh, leave
the rest of the show open for people who might want to call in. Uh, there's just about seven
minutes left, I think. So the number, if you would like to call is 707-923-3911. Uh, Dr. Ray
Peat is joining us and, uh, we'll start to get into some of the, um, topic of, uh, viruses and
viricides and, uh, the kind of latest, uh, research that's been done. And we'll probably have to
carry this over till next month. So, uh, people, if they've listened to this and we're expecting
to get some more than, uh, the last segment of this show on the subject, then next month,
I think we'll probably carry this over. So Dr. Peat, um, again, I've questioned you about viruses
and I, we, I've questioned you many times about, uh, things like hepatitis virus and, um, how we
talk, I know you've mentioned the Zika virus outbreak that I think you would have a very
different, um, uh, explanation for. And you've mentioned, uh, I think a person's physiology
and the terroir of the person being very responsible for actually having an outcome of,
uh, coming down with it or resisting it. And I think that's, uh, I think that's quite, quite a
fit answer. Um, let me just hold on a second here cause the lights are going crazy in the, uh, in
the engineer's room there. So I'm not too sure whether he's lining, lining people up. I think
he is. Uh, I probably just hold that train of thought cause we have a caller. So yeah, uh,
caller you're on the air. In fact, we have two. So let's take this first caller on the air and
what's your name and where are you from? What's your question? Sorry. I'm Robin. Am I on? Yeah,
you're on Robin. Where are you from? Okay, great. I'm from, uh, West Haven. From where? West Haven,
Humboldt County. Oh, okay. Go ahead. What's your question, Robin? Yeah. Um, and you should turn
your radio down. I think you, I think you might have a radio on in the background. Yeah. Will
you turn that radio down? Good. Um, one is about gallbladder and healing it. Okay. And, um, I have,
I'm, my gallbladder's not, you know, not functioning very well. Okay. And, and a friend
was talking about doing a fast, a great fast, um, which I've been hearing about, like, you know,
intense fasting and that that can be really helpful. In fact, my naturopath also recommended
it. So I wanted to hear what Dr. Peat had to say about that. Well, intense fasting is definitely
not to be recommended. So first I will let Dr. Peat go for it, but, um, go ahead, Dr. Peat. Did you say
grape? Grape fasting? Yes. Yeah, I did. Great. Yeah. Years ago, I read a book called The Grape
Cure by a South African doctor. And, um, I knew people, uh, someone started a little health clinic
across the border in Mexico, uh, based on the, the grape diet. And so I investigated, uh, that was
one of the things that got me interested in the purple pigment in the grapes and other fruit as a
stimulant to proper oxygen use. And, uh, combined with sugar and the, uh, minerals in grape juice,
uh, grape juice does have a great therapeutic effects or, or, uh, just eating the whole grapes,
but either one, uh, it has many, uh, therapeutic effects. So, um, the call of Robin, um, in terms
of your gallbladder, do you have things like obstruction or do you have deficient bowel
production and fat intolerance? Or what's, what, what's the diagnosis with your gallbladder?
I have fat intolerance. There's nothing showing up on ultrasound, but I also have, um, you know,
kind of a whole mix of, um, hypothyroid and some, um, mold sensitivity. And I'm dealing with SIBO
right now. And so the gallbladder is very sensitive to low thyroid function or high estrogen in
relation to progesterone. Progesterone relaxes it. Estrogen tends to cause spasms and, uh, the,
the sick reaction to fats is because the thresholds are lowered by the high estrogen to progesterone
ratio. And the key to it is almost always low thyroid function. You correct your, your metabolism
by getting your body temperature up to a daytime, typically around 98.6 Fahrenheit or 37 degrees
centigrade. I have also definitely seen a good case in point for, um, plant bitters, uh, based
on things like the Swedish bitters formula, uh, things that will increase your digestive enzymes
and your stomach pH and, uh, pepsin production and those kinds of things. The fat intolerance anyway,
uh, definitely, uh, works very well to reduce flatulence and bloating and that kind of thing,
which is a kind of derangement of, uh, pH. Okay. Well, we do have one more caller. So let's get
this, uh, next caller on the air and, uh, caller you're on the air. What's your question? Where
are you from? Hi. My question is about, uh, I'm from Eureka. My question is about, uh,
if Dr. Peat knows of any medical condition or cause that would lead a person to, uh, develop, uh,
digestive issues where there's like a frequent and loose bowel movements, as well as high blood
pressure, things that just sort of came out of the blue, but about the same time in my life.
Okay. Dr. Peat, did you get that? Um, uh, yeah. Um, uh, there are lots of things that
can be involved, but, um, uh, stress physiology, uh, it is generally involved in both, uh, uh,
inflammation and a tendency to diarrhea and, uh, high blood pressure. Uh, and, uh, you, you,
have you had blood tests? Uh, uh, yeah, yeah. They've, they've been normal.
Uh, everything has been, has looked really good. What do you think about anti-serotonin?
Yeah. Low thyroid function with a TSH measurement, uh, up to three, they call normal, but, uh,
anything above one is likely to, uh, promote inflammation, including in the intestine.
And, uh, high serotonin is the main thing that contributes to, uh, uh, an overactive bowel.
And it's also, it's, it's named, uh, for its ability to constrict blood vessels and raise
blood pressure. And, uh, uh, there, there are drugs that will lower it such as, uh,
cyproheptadine, but, uh, usually you can, uh, change your diet to reduce the inflammatory foods,
uh, such as starches or, uh, raw or undercooked vegetables that are, uh, support bacteria that
cause the intestine inflammation. So less starch, uh, and less raw vegetable matter?
Salads and bread and, uh, beans and, and nuts and even potatoes can, uh, sometimes
feed the bacteria that cause the inflammation and release serotonin.
Okay. All right. So, and you look at that, you can, you can, you get a measurement on your,
the serotonin that you have in your body. I mean, it's a blood test. Do that with blood,
a blood plat, uh, analysis do that? It will usually show up as increased reverse T3
and sometimes, uh, an actual low, uh, T3 count. Uh, but, uh, the, the simplest approach to it is to,
uh, eat a bland fiber. Uh, some people, uh, are okay with, uh, cooked oat bran as a mush,
but, uh, some bacteria can feed on that and cooked mushrooms and, uh, cooked bamboo shoots
are, are bland fibers that will, uh, uh, often will lower the serotonin and diarrhea effect.
Okay. Thank you very much. Appreciate it.
Um, Dr. Peat, thanks so much for your time. I'll give out information about how to find more about
you. Oh, okay. Thanks. Thank you. Okay. So for people who've listened to the show, um, every
third Friday of the month, uh, we do a one hour talk show, uh, with Dr. Peat is our host and,
um, he can be contacted, uh, through the internet. He has a website, which is www.raypeat.com.
R-A-Y-P-E-A-T.com. Um, he's got a lot of, uh, well, uh, well-written articles that are fully referenced
and very educational. Uh, I will say that they are very scientific. So if you're a really are
a real basic lay person, you might find it a little hard going. Uh, but if you have any real
interest in science and research, and you'd like to dig deep and find out things, uh, be a very
good place to look for the articles that will quote why things he's saying are the way they are.
Um, I can also be reached as well, Monday through Friday, um, either email me or, uh, send a, you
know, voicemail to our, uh, 888 number, which is 1-888-WBM-ERB or, uh, my email address is
Andrew@westernbotanicalmedicine.com. Um, okay. So until the third Friday of next month,
I wish you all good night and we will carry on. Just for those listening now,
I never got into hardly anything to do with, uh, viricidal activity of compounds, chemicals,
medicinal plants, uh, and how, uh, we can, again, through Dr. Peat's wisdom,
best arm ourself with the best possible choice, best possible chance of staying healthy. Okay.
So till, uh, this same time, third Friday of next month, good night.